Day 0
=====

We're going to use Python to create a simple application that we're going to make and use under source control--specifically git.

The goal here is to learn the basics of git, vim, and some terminal commands to get you proficient around the _tooling_ of a developer.


## 0: Open up your favorite Linux Terminal

For those of you on Windows, you'll want to install the Windows Subsystem for Linux. (If anyone needs help with this, let me know.)

From there, you'll need/want to know how to do some basic terminal commands. I'll include these as they come up.


## 1: Type in the following commands to make sure our requirements are met:

- `git --help`
- `python3 --version`

That's it! ... For Now.

**Terminal Tip**: You can clear the screen by hitting `CTRL+L` or by typing in `clear`.


## 2: Create a directory for our project

Back in your terminal, type in the following commands:

- `mkdir diceroller`
- `cd diceroller` 


## 3: The Very Basics of Vim

Okay, we're going to be learning the very very basics of Vim.

**Don't panic!**

Vim is powerful and unintuitive to a beginner, but we only need a few basic commands to get started, and we'll be learning more as we go along.

From the terminal:

- `vim README.md`

This will launch you into a strange looking window with our new README.md file.

The basics of Vim:

- Vim will start you in what is called NORMAL mode.
- To enter text like other text editors, you'll need to be in INSERT mode.
- Hit `i` to enter INSERT mode.
- Type in the text that you want to write. You can use the arrow keys to navigate around.
- Hit `[ESC]` to exit INSERT mode and return to NORMAL mode.
- Type `:wq` to write your changes and exit.

Here's what I'm going to be putting in my README.md:

```
diceroller
==========

A simple command line application that rolls dice from the command line.
```

### Exiting Vim, or Help, I'm using Vim because I never learned how to exit

Hitting the wrong key at the wrong time can enter you into some strange places inside of Vim. Without knowledge of how to do it, you might not even know how to exit vim at all.

Here's Captain Danger's foolproof plan for escaping Vim.

- Hit `[ESC]`... sometimes multiple times. This will return you to the NORMAL mode.
- Hit `:`. When you're inside NORMAL mode, the **colon** key will put you in the COMMAND LINE mode. At the bottom of your screen, you will see something like this:

> :

This shows that you've entered the COMMAND LINE mode.

- Now that you're in the COMMAND LINE mode, you can type one of the following commands to quit:

- `q` - This will quit vim without writing
- `wq` - This will write your changes and then quit
- `q!` - This will quit and ignore unsaved changes.


## 4 Looking at our README.md

From the terminal, type the following command to show the contents of your README.md:

`cat README.md`

**cat** stands for **concatenate**

And... that's all for now! We'll make our first git commit in the next lesson.
