Day 01 - Making our first commit
================================

Today, we're going to be setting up `git`, setting up our first repo, and then making a change.

We will _not_ be pushing up to github... not yet! 


## Setting Up Git

We're going to start by configuring one `global` `git` option:

- `core.editor` -- which text editor is used by `git`. We're going to be configuring this to vim

In order to configure this option, we need to be back in our terminal environment and type in the following command:

- `git config --global core.editor vim`

This command will change our global core.editor to `vim`. You are welcome to use another editor (like `emacs` or `nano`), but this course will assume you're using `vim`, so any text commands will need to be translated for your editor of choice.


## Initializing our Git Repository

Navigate to our `diceroller` directory and type in the following command: `git add README.md`

This command will fail and give you an error:

```
$ git add README.md
fatal: not a git repository (or any parent up to mount point /mnt)
```

Most of the time, `git` is pretty good at telling you when something has gone wrong. Learning what the error messages mean and how to resolve them is a critical part of learning any tool or language.  I find it helpful to stop and read the error out loud. Reading something out loud forces your brain to slow down and actually _read_ the error.

In this case, the error is simple: `not a git repository (or any parent up to mount point /mnt)`. It means that this folder is not a `git` repository, and it didn't find one as it walked up the tree.

To resolve this, we have to actually **initialize** our `git` repository. And, so, we learn our first arcane `git` command:

`git init`

This will give you something like this:

```
captain@Skyshield:~/diceroller$ git init
Initialized empty Git repository in /home/captain/diceroller/.git/
```

## Creating our first commit

Now that we have a `git` repository, we can now go ahead and create our first commit. To do that, we're going to use the second arcane `git` command: 

`git commit`

Now if you've done this and have been following this tutorial, you may run into the following error:

```
captain@Skyshield:~/diceroller$ git commit

*** Please tell me who you are.

Run

  git config --global user.email "you@example.com"
  git config --global user.name "Your Name"

to set your account's default identity.
Omit --global to set the identity only in this repository.

fatal: empty ident name (for <captain@Skyshield.localdomain>) not allowed
```

Once again, `git`'s error messages can seem verbose and intimidating. But, as always, reading the error output out loud will give us a clue as to what is going on.

```
Please tell me who you are.
```

Git is telling us that it can't figure out who we are. Each and every commit is signed with a name and an email. Git then gives us a series of commands to use to configure our `user.name` and `user.email`.

```
  git config --global user.email "you@example.com"
  git config --global user.name "Your Name"
```

### user.name and user.email

If you're like me, you might want to configure this on a per-project basis. In which case, instead of doing `git config --global`, just do `git config ...`

### Back to committing...

Now that we've configured our `user.name` and `user.email`, we can now once again do `git commit`.

This time, your terminal will output something like this:

```
On branch master

Initial commit

Untracked files:
  (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)
        README.md

nothing added to commit but untracked files present (use "git add" to track)
```

So... we still haven't actually created a commit. Once again, let's start by reading the output line by line:

```
On branch master
```

In `git`, we have the concept of `branches`.

```
Initial commit
```

This tells you that right now that you have no commits in this repository: you are on the Initial commit.

```
Untracked files:
  (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)
        README.md
```

Here we've learned something interesting... the idea of "tracked files" and that we need to `add` those in order to commit them. So, let's go and do that.

### git add

`git add` is one of the core commands of `git`. `git add` will let you add individual files that you want commited.

To start, let's look at the `manual` for `git add`:

- `man git add` or...
- `git add --help`

In both of these cases, you are going to get a ton of information that is, frankly, overwhelming. So let's take a detour and install a more simplified help file.

### tldr

`tldr` is a linux program that gives simplified man pages. It's useful for quick reference on things and recipes for common operations.

- `sudo apt install tldr`

Then we can check out the `tldr` for `git`:

- `tldr git`


### Back to git-add

To check out the simplified help for `git add`, we need to use a hyphen like so: 

`tldr git-add`

That will pump out something like this:

```
git add
Adds changed files to the index.More information: https://git-scm.com/docs/git-add.

 - Add a file to the index:
   git add {{path/to/file}}

 - Add all files (tracked and untracked):
   git add -A

 - Only add already tracked files:
   git add -u

 - Also add ignored files:
   git add -f

 - Interactively stage parts of files:
   git add -p

 - Interactively stage parts of a given file:
   git add -p {{path/to/file}}

 - Interactively stage a file:
   git add -i
```

The very first entry gives us the command we want `git add {{path/to/file}}`

So... let's add our file!

### Adding a file

So now, we add our file:

`git add README.md`

If you've done this properly, you'll get no output. In Linux, commands that complete successfully will often have no output.

So... now is it time to commit?

Well, almost. But we're going to teach good habits from the start. So _before_ we do a commit, we're going to check out the status of our working directory.


### Checking git status

Here's our next important arcane `git` command: `git status`

Typing `git status` into our `/diceroller` repository will show the following:

```
On branch master

No commits yet

Changes to be committed:
  (use "git rm --cached <file>..." to unstage)
        new file:   README.md
```

You'll notice some changes have happened now. We see that we're still on `branch master` (whatever that means), we see that we have `No commits yet`, and finally, we have `Changes to be committed`, which is different from before.

Under changes to be commited, there's a reference to some arcane `git` command, but more importantly, there's a `new file:   README.md`.

This tells us that the new file 'README.md' has been staged and is ready to be commited.


### So... now can we commit?

Yes! Now, we can finally make our actual first commit.

For now, go ahead and use this command:

- `git commit`

### Holy crap, where are we now?

We have just entered the `git` commit window, where we can hand write our commit messages... and do a lot more! We'll learn more about this window at some point in the future, but for now, it's enough to know how to enter our basic commit message.

If you've followed the instructions up until now, you're inside `vim`. So here's what to do, step-by-step:

1. Hit `i` to enter INSERT mode
2. Type in `Initial commit`
3. Hit `[ESC]` to exit INSERT mode and return to NORMAL mode
4. Hit `:` to enter the COMMAND LINE mode
5. Type in `wq` and then press `[ENTER]` to finalize your message and commit!

Once you've exited Vim, you'll receive output similar to this:

```
[master (root-commit) bb2f430] Initial commit
 1 file changed, 4 insertions(+)
 create mode 100755 README.md
```

You've just created your first commit!

Next time, we'll make more commits, talk about the commit cycle, and more!
