Day 03 - Making a Typo
======================

Today, we're going to make more commits to our README.md... including a typo! And then we're going to start learning what to do about bad commits.

## Making a Typo

First thing to do today is to fire up `vim README.md` and make some changes. We're going to add another example to our README.md, but quite intentionally, we're _also_ going to make a typo:

```
./diceroller.py 6 - Rolls a random 6 sided diee
```

Use `:wq` to save your changes and exit. Then check your status with `git status`. You should see that our README.md has been modified.

Now go ahead and commit that change using `git commit -v` (As a reminder, we use -v to see a diff inside our `git` commit window).

You'll see something like this:

```

# Please enter the commit message for your changes. Lines starting
# with '#' will be ignored, and an empty message aborts the commit.
#
# On branch master
# Changes to be committed:
#       modified:   README.md
#
# ------------------------ >8 ------------------------
# Do not modify or remove the line above.
# Everything below it will be ignored.
diff --git a/README.md b/README.md
index b4a8f44..0fb4ec5 100755
--- a/README.md
+++ b/README.md
@@ -6,4 +6,5 @@ A simple python application that rolls dice from the command line.
 Example:

 ./diceroller.py 20 - Rolls a random 20 sided die
+./diceroller.py 6 - Rolls a random 6 sided diee

~
~
```

Now let's make our commit. Remember the rules of a good commit message:

- Subject line in imperative voice, 50 characters or less
- Added explanation line if necessary

Here's my example commit message:

```
Add another example to README.md
```

Commit with `:wq`. Then you'll be returned to the terminal and get some `git` additional output like so:

```
[master 4813366] Add another example to README.md
 1 file changed, 1 insertion(+)
```

We'll be doing something with our typo... but for now, let's take a brief detour and look at the `git log` format.


## git log

Start by reading the following chapter on [**2.3 - Viewing the Commit History**](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Basics-Viewing-the-Commit-History).

Let's view our `git log` one more time. It'll pipe out three entries for you. Let's break down the default `git log` format line by line.

```
commit 4813366c2e4d0ce7547487cb77fa3cc9b46db384 (HEAD -> master)
Author: Captain Danger <therealcaptaindanger@gmail.com>
Date:   Tue Jul 13 23:42:51 2021 -0500

    Add another example to README.md
```

### The Commit Line

```
commit 4813366c2e4d0ce7547487cb77fa3cc9b46db384 (HEAD -> master)
```

This first line is made up of two parts:

The first is `commit 4813366c2e4d0ce7547487cb77fa3cc9b46db384`, which is the **commit hash**. The commit hash is the unique identifier for the commit. You can actually find where these objects are stored inside of your `.git` repository.

The second part is `(HEAD -> master)`. It's telling you two separate things. The first is `HEAD`. `HEAD` is a special identifier telling you what commit you're currently on. The second part is `-> master`, which is telling you that our `HEAD` identifier is pointing at the `master` branch. 

`HEAD` is actually just a plain text file found inside of your `.git` repository that points somewhere else.

From the root of your `diceroller` application, type in `cat .git/HEAD`, and you should see the following pipe out:

```
ref: refs/heads/master
```

This is telling you that the `HEAD` identifier is looking for the reference found at `refs/heads/master`.

So what commit is that actually going to give you? Well, we can find that out too, with `cat .git/refs/heads/master`. For me, that shows:

```
$ cat .git/refs/heads/master
4813366c2e4d0ce7547487cb77fa3cc9b46db384
```

That hash should look familiar--it's the same hash as our last commit.

### The Metadata

The next two lines give us two critical pieces of data:

```
Author: Captain Danger <therealcaptaindanger@gmail.com>
Date:   Tue Jul 13 23:42:51 2021 -0500
```

The first line gives us the commit author. Each commit is uniquely assigned an author, name and email. The second line gives us the date of the commit. It's important to note that both author and date can be fudged. There's nothing stopping you from committing as a different person or setting your commit date at a different time. As a good citizen, you should always commit as yourself and set the date as something reasonable--or just let `git` handle the dates.

### The Commit Message

The last and most important part of any commit is the **commit message**. Those messages you've been typing into `vim` are what you see here. Right now, the commit message is pretty boring: it's just one-line. However, as we continue our `git` learnings, we'll be making longer/more useful `git` commit messages.


### One last thing on git log for now

Right now, we only have three entries in our `git` log. And that's not bad... but there's a _lot_ of information piped out to the screen already. Sometimes, we might want a more condensed version of the `git log`. Thankfully, `git` provides plenty of options for customizing our log output to be something we need. We'll look at one of those options right now: `--oneline`.

`git log --oneline` will pipe the output in, you guessed it, one line:

```
4813366 (HEAD -> master) Add another example to README.md
53728a7 Add CLI example to README.md
bb2f430 Initial commit
```

## What to do about our bad commit

So, back to commits. We've made a typo in our previous commit. We need to somehow _fix_ the last commit that we made to erase the typo. Like many things with `git`, there are many ways of repairing what we've done. We're going to learn one way right now and explore other methods later.

Changing the active commit is such a common activity that `git` provides a useful command for doing that. But first, let's open up `vim` and make our changes: `vim README.md`.

Once we've eliminated our typo, we can see what has changed by typing in `git diff`. The output will look something like this:

```
diff --git a/README.md b/README.md
index 0fb4ec5..2f8d51f 100755
--- a/README.md
+++ b/README.md
@@ -6,5 +6,5 @@ A simple python application that rolls dice from the command line.
 Example:

 ./diceroller.py 20 - Rolls a random 20 sided die
-./diceroller.py 6 - Rolls a random 6 sided diee
+./diceroller.py 6 - Rolls a random 6 sided die

```

This output _should_ look familiar to you: it's the same diff that we've seen inside the `git` commit message window before. But now we can see the information in our terminal window without having to make a commit.

Take a moment to look through the `man git diff`.

...

Just kidding, that's way too much. Start with `tldr git-diff`, which will provide you some simple, useful commands that you will likely use in your `git` career. You can always look through the `man`ual or search Stack Overflow later on (and likely will), but `tldr` is always a great place to start.

Now that we've made our changes, let's commit with `git commit`.

Whoops! We've got an error:

```
On branch master
Changes not staged for commit:
  (use "git add <file>..." to update what will be committed)
  (use "git restore <file>..." to discard changes in working directory)
        modified:   README.md

no changes added to commit (use "git add" and/or "git commit -a")
```

You'll notice the last line of output says `no changes added to commit (use "git add" and/or "git commit -a"). Once again, `git` is usually reasonably helpful at pointing out what you've done wrong when something goes wrong. In this case, we haven't staged our changes.

You'll also notice that `git` gave us two suggestions on adding files: `git add` and/or `git commit -a`. The first command is what we've been using up until now. The second is a shortcut that will let us stage and add all **tracked** and **modified** files.


### Captain's Soapbox - Add files individually

Add your files individually. Don't use `git commit -a` unless you've done a very small change. Part of creating a beautiful, usable `git` commit history is narrating your commits. Your `git` history tells the development story of your project. The hardest part of development on mature projects is going back and reading old code... of understanding the reasoning that changes were made, when and why and how. 

`git commit -a` will get you into lazy habits. It's a shortcut--a useful shortcut when your `git` skills are developed, but right now, making stages and commits individually will teach you better habits.


### git commit --amend

Back to fixing our last commit. Start by staging the commit with `git add README.md`. Then check the status by doing `git status`. If you've done this properly, you'll see the stages committed like so:

```
On branch master
Changes to be committed:
  (use "git restore --staged <file>..." to unstage)
        modified:   README.md
```

Now, instead of doing `git commit`, we're going to add `--amend`. Let's also use `-v` to add the diff to the commit message editor.

Now, if you've been paying attention, the diff out put may look different than you expect:

```
diff --git a/README.md b/README.md
index b4a8f44..2f8d51f 100755
--- a/README.md
+++ b/README.md
@@ -6,4 +6,5 @@ A simple python application that rolls dice from the command line.
 Example:

 ./diceroller.py 20 - Rolls a random 20 sided die
+./diceroller.py 6 - Rolls a random 6 sided die
```

Here was the diff produced earlier:

```
diff --git a/README.md b/README.md
index 0fb4ec5..2f8d51f 100755
--- a/README.md
+++ b/README.md
@@ -6,5 +6,5 @@ A simple python application that rolls dice from the command line.
 Example:

 ./diceroller.py 20 - Rolls a random 20 sided die
-./diceroller.py 6 - Rolls a random 6 sided diee
+./diceroller.py 6 - Rolls a random 6 sided die

```

What's the difference? Well, by amending the previous commit, we are rewriting history. Instead of the original change that we made, we now just have the change that we actually want:

```
+./diceroller.py 6 - Rolls a random 6 sided die
```

We don't care about the change from `diee` to `die`. We only care about the original change, where we added the line `./diceroller.py 6 - Rolls a random 6 sided die`. This is what we meant earlier about narrating your development history. We don't care that we made a typo. Fixing typos are not valuable in our commit history. What we care about is that we added the line in the first place.

You'll also notice that the original message has already been put inside the top of our `vim` window. So, unless we want to change the commit message, we can now just do `:wq` to save and exit `vim`.

So now we look at our `git log`, and we see a nice clean history--no mention of typos.

Now, one last thing before we close out Day 3.


## Captain's Golden Rule - Don't Rewrite History That Is Public

Rewriting history using `git` is a powerful part of using `git`. A little history tidying now will pay off dividends down the road.

But.

**You must not rewrite history that is public and shared.**

This isn't a problem right now, but when we get to distributing our source control (on services like Github), it will be critically important. Rewriting history that is public and shared will cause _massive problems_ for other people, up to and including erasing work that isn't yours. Don't do it. We'll talk more about this when we get to distributing source control on github.

Anyway that's it for Day 3!
