Day 4 - Actual code!
====================

Today, we're going to be writing some actual code and committing it! But first we'll be renaming our `master` branch to `main`.


## Master -> Main

Renaming a branch in (modern) `git` is very simple: 

```
git branch -m <old_branch_name> <new_branch_name>
```

For the rest of these days, we will be having our `git` branches labeled as `main` instead of `master`.

Why `main` over `master`? `Master` is an old reference in technology to `master` and `slave`. This terminology is harmful and unnecessary. There's nothing special about `master` as a name. Using an alternate (like `main` or `trunk`) is perfectly reasonable and does good.


## Adding our first source file

Let's make our first source file! From the terminal, make a blank file called `diceroller.py`.

You can make blank files by using the command `touch`: `touch diceroller.py`.

Let's go ahead and create a basic implementation of `diceroller.py`:

```
import random
import sys

def dice(n):
    print(f"You rolled a {random.randint(1, n)}")

dice(int(sys.argv[1]))
```

We'll do some one test real quick:

- `python3 diceroller.py 3`

Looks like our manual test has passed. So let's go ahead and create our first commit.

## Creating our first commit

First, we start by manually adding the file with `git add diceroller.py`

Then we check the status to make sure there's nothing else ready for commit with `git status`.

```
On branch main
Changes to be committed:
  (use "git restore --staged <file>..." to unstage)
        new file:   diceroller.py
```

Finally we commit with `git commit`. You can optionally use -v if you want to see what we've added. In this case, I choose not to use -v because I know I've added a new file and what the contents are. However, if you want to use `-v`, by all means go for it.

### Write a good commit message

Remember:

- Action verb, present tense, (the imperative mood) in your subject
- 50 characters or less
- Added explanation text as necessary

In this case, all we've done is create a very first implementation of our diceroller, so my commit message is simple and oneline:

`Add basic dice() implementation`


Commit!

```
[main 720735e] Add basic dice() implementation
 1 file changed, 9 insertions(+)
 create mode 100644 diceroller.py
```

Now, check our log with `git log`:

```
commit 720735e8fa6c924cf1e8eb52fa36364849eea319 (HEAD -> main)
Author: Captain Danger <therealcaptaindanger@gmail.com>
Date:   Thu Jul 15 18:44:29 2021 -0500

    Add basic dice() implementation

commit b14cc1f075d4547b9930abc757aabe78351859ae
Author: Captain Danger <therealcaptaindanger@gmail.com>
Date:   Tue Jul 13 23:42:51 2021 -0500

    Add another example to README.md

commit 53728a78a8f57196319d8cbb69c2f657d5788684
Author: Captain Danger <therealcaptaindanger@gmail.com>
Date:   Tue Jul 13 15:07:44 2021 -0500

    Add CLI example to README.md

commit bb2f4308db6f82be64d225a643e138f0cb997b75
Author: Captain Danger <therealcaptaindanger@gmail.com>
Date:   Mon Jul 12 21:00:55 2021 -0500

    Initial commit
```

## Making changes

We've got this initial implementation, but now we want to add some basic error handling. Let's check for the length:

```
import random
import sys

def dice(n):
    print(f"You rolled a {random.randint(1, n)}")

if len(sys.argv) != 2:
    print("Only takes one argument!")
    sys.exit(1)

dice(int(sys.argv[1]))
```

That's fine for now. So let's go ahead and commit that change. Remember, the steps are:

- `git add diceroller.py`
- Optional: `git status`
- `git commit -v`
  - This time, it's good to add -v so we can see the diff of what we're adding:

```

# Please enter the commit message for your changes. Lines starting
# with '#' will be ignored, and an empty message aborts the commit.
#
# On branch main
# Changes to be committed:
#       modified:   diceroller.py
#
# ------------------------ >8 ------------------------
# Do not modify or remove the line above.
# Everything below it will be ignored.
diff --git a/diceroller.py b/diceroller.py
index 7ac71d2..358dcb5 100644
--- a/diceroller.py
+++ b/diceroller.py
@@ -4,6 +4,9 @@ import sys
 def dice(n):
     print(f"You rolled a {random.randint(1, n)}")

+if len(sys.argv) != 2:
+    print("Only takes one argument!")
+    sys.exit(1)

 dice(int(sys.argv[1]))

~        
~
```

Let's look at the diff once more. This part should all be familiar:

```
# Please enter the commit message for your changes. Lines starting
# with '#' will be ignored, and an empty message aborts the commit.
#
# On branch main
# Changes to be committed:
#       modified:   diceroller.py
#
```

This next line is the cut line. It's how `git` knows not to include the rest of the code:

```
# ------------------------ >8 ------------------------
```

Next is a reminder not to remove the line above (or you'll break the cut).

```
# Do not modify or remove the line above.
# Everything below it will be ignored.
```

The next part is the start of our actual diff. The first line shows what we are diffing between along with some revision information.

```
diff --git a/diceroller.py b/diceroller.py
index 7ac71d2..358dcb5 100644
```

Next comes the diff we've seen before:

```
--- a/diceroller.py
+++ b/diceroller.py
@@ -4,6 +4,9 @@ import sys
 def dice(n):
     print(f"You rolled a {random.randint(1, n)}")

+if len(sys.argv) != 2:
+    print("Only takes one argument!")
+    sys.exit(1)

 dice(int(sys.argv[1]))
 ```

 You'll see that the diff has provided some context lines around the change, but not the entirety of the program. 


### Writing a good commit message

Remember:

- Action verb, present tense, (the imperative mood) in your subject
- 50 characters or less
- Added explanation text as necessary

So what would a good commit message look like? Well, we've made our first significant change to our code. Let's start with a subject line and see if that's enough explanatory text to explain the _why_ of our change:

```
Add basic CLI error handling
```

Here's the question: does this comment, when read along with the code, provide context for the change that we made?

In this case, I would say it does. We don't need to explain _what_ the code does, we need to explain _why_ the code was written.  Of course, if you think you need a more verbose message, by all means add more context.

So with commit message written, let's hit `:wq` to write our changes and exit.


## Adding another change

Our error handling is very rudimentary right now. It doesn't actually check for the correctness of the argument. We only want to accept integers for our diceroller. So let's add some more error handling to the code.

Roughly speaking, what we need to do is:

- Check the `sys.argv[1]` and make sure we can convert it into an `int()`
- If it's not an `int()`, we want to gracefully fail out
- If it does cast properly, execute our `dice()` function.

We'll start by pulling out the `int(sys.argv[1])`. 


### Some more vim commands

Here's one way to cleanly write the code we need to using the power of `vim`. I'm not going to explain these commands in a lot of depth, but if you follow these instructions _exactly_, you should be able to follow along. Right now, this is about doing some motions without completely understanding context. Understanding will come later!

Of course, if you _want_ to learn more about `vim`, you should go through the `vimtutor` which is probably installed in your friendly *nix terminal.

Anyway! Here are the editing commands. You'll want to type these exactly as they're written. in order:

- `vim diceroller.py` -- Opens up our editor and drops us into `vim`. You are currently in `NORMAL` mode.
- `G` -- **Capital G** is a shortcut that will take you to the end of the file.

You are now either on the line with `dice(int(sys.argv[1]))` or the line below (it's customary in many programming languages to leave an extra blank line at the end of your source).

**If you are below the `dice(...)` line, use the following command to get to the dice line:

- `k` -- **Lowercase k** is another way to move up in Vim. This is called a `motion`. See **Moving in vim** for more info.
    - Repeat this as many times as necessary

Okay, now we should all be on the `dice(...)` line.

- `0` -- The **number 0** will take us to the start of the line (depending on reasons, you might not be at the start of the line)
- `f(` -- **Lowercase f** is short for **find**. The **(** tells `vim` what we're looking to find. It will then take us to the very first instance of that character.
- `ci)` -- **Lowercase c** is short for **change**. **i**, in this context, stands for **in-between**, and the **)** finishes the sentence, telling us to change in between parentheses. Put more succinctly, `ci)` is a **normal mode command sentence** that tells us to **change in-between parenthesis**.

Once you've executed this command, you will be dropped into insert mode. (The **change** command drops us into `INSERT` mode).

- Type in `sides` and then hit `[ESC]` to return us to **NORMAL** mode.
- `O` -- **Capital O** is a `vim` command that creates a new line above our current line and drops us into `INSERT` mode. (No, not every `vim` command has a nice mnenomic)

Type in the next part _exactly_, or you're going to get lost:

- `try:` and then `[ENTER]` -- We're still in **INSERT** mode.
- If your `vim` is set up to handle python detection (which it likely is), then you'll already be hanging over four spaces. If not, hit `[TAB]` to insert four spaces.
- `sides = ` -- Note the extra space and that we're still in **INSERT** mode.

At this point, your screen should look something like this:

```
import random
import sys

def dice(n):
    print(f"You rolled a {random.randint(1, n)}")

if len(sys.argv) != 2:
    print("Only takes one argument!")
    sys.exit(1)

try:
    sides = |

dice(sides)

~
~
~
~
~
-- INSERT --                                                                                          12,13         All 
```

Your cursor should be blinking right at the space after sides.

Do these next commands carefully!

- `[CTRL] + r` -- You should see single double quote suddenly appear to the right of your cursor:

```
import random
import sys

def dice(n):
    print(f"You rolled a {random.randint(1, n)}")

if len(sys.argv) != 2:
    print("Only takes one argument!")
    sys.exit(1)

try:
    sides = "

dice(sides)

~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
-- INSERT --                                                                                ^R        12,13         All 
```

- `'` -- Hitting the single quotation mark will **paste** the last thing that you copied.

But wait! We didn't copy anything! Didn't we?

Well, actually, we did.

In `vim`, when we delete something using special commands inside of normal mode, those deletions are automatically put into the copy/paste register. There's a _Lot_ more to know about that, but know that this is one of those things that makes `vim` powerful.

Moving on!

- Type in the rest of our code:

```
except ValueError:
    print("Argument must be a number!")
    sys.exit(1)
```

- Hit `[ESC]` to finally exit `INSERT` mode and return to `NORMAL` mode.
- Type `:wq` to write our file and exit

### What our code should actually look like

When all is said and done, our code should look like this:

```
import random
import sys

def dice(n):
    print(f"You rolled a {random.randint(1, n)}")

if len(sys.argv) != 2:
    print("Only takes one argument!")
    sys.exit(1)

try:
    sides = int(sys.argv[1])
except ValueError:
    print("Argument must be a number!")
    sys.exit(1)

dice(sides)

```


## Testing our change

Let's test our change before we commit.

```
$ python diceroller.py abc
Argument must be a number!
$
```

Looks like it works! If it didn't, go back and make sure your code looks right.

## Making a new commit

Remember our workflow:

- Check `git status`
- `git add` the file(s) that changed
- Check `git status` to make sure we added only what we wanted
- Commit and write a good commit message with `git commit -v`

You should **absolutely** use the `-v` this time around.

## Writing a good commit message

Time to write our `git` commit message again. Remember the rules of a good `git` commit:

- Action verb, present tense, (the imperative mood) in your subject
- 50 characters or less
- Added explanation text as necessary

But before we get into _what_ we want to write, let's look at the changes

### Examining the diff

Our `git` window is getting a lot more crowded now. We might not even get all the output in a single screen. (I didn't in my stubby terminal window).

```

# Please enter the commit message for your changes. Lines starting
# with '#' will be ignored, and an empty message aborts the commit.
#
# On branch main
# Changes to be committed:
#       modified:   diceroller.py
#
# Untracked files:
#       dicroller-final.py
#
# ------------------------ >8 ------------------------
# Do not modify or remove the line above.
# Everything below it will be ignored.
diff --git a/diceroller.py b/diceroller.py
index 358dcb5..62a72ac 100644
--- a/diceroller.py
+++ b/diceroller.py
@@ -8,5 +8,11 @@ if len(sys.argv) != 2:
     print("Only takes one argument!")
     sys.exit(1)

-dice(int(sys.argv[1]))
+try:
+    sides = int(sys.argv[1])
+except ValueError:
+    print("Argument must be a number!")
+    sys.exit(1)
+
+dice(sides)

~ 
~
```

If you can't see the **diff** part of the commit, hold down `j` or `[Down Arrow]` to scroll all the way down. Here's the important part of the diff this time:

```
-dice(int(sys.argv[1]))
+try:
+    sides = int(sys.argv[1])
+except ValueError:
+    print("Argument must be a number!")
+    sys.exit(1)
+
+dice(sides)
```

As a reminder:

- The line(s) that start with the `-` tells us what has been removed.
- The line(s) that start with the `+` tell us what has been added.

Look at the two `dice` lines:

```
-dice(int(sys.argv[1]))

...

+dice(sides)
```

You'll notice that it says we've added the `dice(sides)` line and removed the `dice(int(sys.argv[1]))` line. That's how `git` thinks about changed lines: it looks at it as a **removal** of the old line and the **addition** of the new line. It doesn't care that we've just changed the inside of the parenthesis... it's only looking at the change as the **removal** of the old line of code and the **addition** of the new line of code.

### Back to writing our commit message

Okay, so we now know the context of our change. Scroll all the way back up to the top of our commit window and write a message.

- Protip: While in `NORMAL` mode, type `0gg` (Zero followed by two lowercase g's) to return to the 0-th line of the file.

Remember what we're asking: **does this comment, when read along with the code, provide context for the change that we made?** Think about _what_ this change really does. What have we done? Well, we've added more error handling. So we could start with something like ...

> `Add more error handling`.

But that's not a particularly _useful_ commit. It's lacking details around the _why_ of the change. It doesn't explain the **why**, which makes it a **bad commit** So let's try something a bit longer and more explanatory:

> ```Add additional error handling to catch non-numeric inputs. We want to gracefully exit on non-numeric inputs instead of having python throw an exception.```

Now that's a better commit message. It tells us the context of _why_ we made the change. But there's a problem: It's way too long. Depending on how your `vim` is setup, it may even automatically break that into new lines for you if you tried to type that.

Just for you, I'm going to commit this monstrosity and show you what it looks like in the `--oneline` log:

```
413e422 (HEAD -> main) Add additional error handling to catch non-numeric inputs. We want to gracefully exit on non-numeric inputs instead of having python throw an exception.
e8504ba Add basic CLI error handling
720735e Add basic dice() implementation
b14cc1f Add another example to README.md
53728a7 Add CLI example to README.md
bb2f430 Initial commit
```

That's just awful to look at. And depending on context, you might not even see the entire message.

So let's make a good commit message:

```
Add error handling to catch non-numeric inputs

We want to gracefully exit on non-numeric inputs instead of having
python throw an exception.
```

This is a good commit message. The **subject** line tells us what we've done. The body of the commit message goes into the why. I didn't write more here because that's enough for me to know and understand the change. If you feel you need to have more content, by all means, add it in. Honing in on what to write for your commit messages is a skill that takes a lifetime to master.

Now `:wq` to quit and exit. Look at our `--oneline` log now:

```
2838459 (HEAD -> main) Add error handling to catch non-numeric inputs
e8504ba Add basic CLI error handling
720735e Add basic dice() implementation
b14cc1f Add another example to README.md
53728a7 Add CLI example to README.md
bb2f430 Initial commit
```

Much nicer! 

## One last thing...

We can look at single commits in our commit history with `git show <commit_id>`. If you want, give that a try and see what comes out! We'll talk more about that tomorrow.

## Appendix A - Moving in Vim - why hjkl?

For reference:

- `h` is left
- `j` is down
- `k` is up
- `l` is right

You can think of `hjkl` as alternates for the arrow keys. Why are these four letters used for Left, Down, Up, Right? The answer is that Bill Joy (the guy who wrote the predecessor to `vim`) used a keyboard that had those arrows on those four letters: [ADM-3A](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ADM-3A#Hardware).