Day 5 - A review
================

Today is going to be a review of the topics we've covered so far:

- `tldr`
- `git init`
- `git config`
- `git status`
- `git add`
- `git commit`
- `git log`
- `git diff`
- `git show`

As we review each command, we're going to do a quick read through of the `tldr git-command` and then discuss/review some of the things we've covered, as well as covering some other things we haven't.

## tldr

As a reminder, `tldr` is full of nice, short and useful examples of how to use commands. You can always use the actual `man` or `--help` to get more information, but `tldr` is a nice place to start.

## git init

`git init` is the command for creating a new bare git repository.

Do `tldr git-init` to read the help.

One new thing to point out here: `--initial-branch={{branch_name}}`.

By default, `git` names its first branch as `master`. I strongly advocate for switching that to something else, like `main` or `trunk`:

- `git init --initial-branch=main`
- `git init --initial-branch=trunk`


### But my git doesn't support that...

Depending on what version of `git` you have, you may not have all the latest and greatest features (like `--initial-branch`). So, in order to do that, you'll need to either compile from source or find a package and add it.

If you're on Debian (ubuntu), you can add from the [Git PPA](https://launchpad.net/~git-core/+archive/ubuntu/ppa)

Here are some instructions:

- `sudo add-apt-repository ppa:git-core/ppa`
- `sudo apt upgrade`
- `sudo apt update`


### What the heck?! apt-get-repository is giving me random python errors!

If you're like me, then one of the first things you do on a new linux distribution is update your python to the latest and greatest version! My version of ubuntu on Linux comes installed with `python3.8`, and I want `python3.9`! I'll also alias `python3` to `python3.9` because I want to be using the latest and greatest.

The problem with that is that many *nix/BSD OS's rely on python scripts to do heavy lifting. And these scripts often use other packages--packages that often come pre-installed. In the case of `add-apt-repository`, it imports a module called `_gi`, which belongs to another package.

There are a _number_ of ways to solve this. And you'll likely have to keep doing that as you use linux. I'm going to list a bunch of methods that should help you on your internet searches:

- Modify the script to point at a different python
- Use `ln -s` to create a symlink between the version of the package that you need and the 'generic' name of the package
- Install the missing package

For `add-apt-repository`, I did the first option:

- `sudo vim /usr/bin/add-apt-repository`
- Change the top line (the **shebang** line) from  `#!/usr/bin/python3` to `#!/usr/bin/python3.8`. (`python3.8` is the system default Python on my Linux distribution).

#### What's the difference between apt and apt-get?

`apt` is essentially a nicer interface/user experience over `apt-get` and related commands like `apt-cache`. You can read a great summary of the differences [in this article on It's FOSS](https://itsfoss.com/apt-vs-apt-get-difference/).


## `git config`

Start with `tldr git config`.

`git config` controls the **configuration** of `git`. It defaults to working inside of your repository, but it can be changed to global configurations with `--global`

One of the nice options here is `git config --edit` and `git config --global --edit`. Sometimes, I need to play around with or change things inside my gitconfig (like adding aliases (which we'll cover some other day)). These options are a shortcut to let you do that without having to manually go to the file.


## git status

Start with `tldr git-status`.

`git status` is something I use all the time. It's almost a personal ritual to `git status` before staging a change, after staging a change, and then after making a commit.

`git status` is particularly useful because it can show you when files you didn't expect to be changed were changed, or if new files randomly show up in your tree. (Random binaries, `.pyc` files, etc.). Learn the `git status`! Love the `git status`!


## git add

Start with `tldr git-add`.

`git add` is used for a lot of things, but its core job is to **stage** files (and changes) that need to be committed. There are a lot of options in here that we haven't gone over so far. Overall, the commands are designed to make it easier to do common add operations or to add batches of files.

- `git add -A` -- add all the files (tracked and untracked)
- `git add .` -- add all the files from a certain directory and down
- `git add -u` -- only add tracked files

Remember our different file stages for git:

- Untracked
- Unmodified (and Tracked)
- Modified (and Tracked)
- Staged (and Tracked)

Some of these commands are very useful for making **atomic** commits. Git is smart enough to stage different parts of files. This allows you to stage related changes in one commit and then stage different, unrelated changes in another commit. This is particularly helpful for when you're fixing unrelated bugs and typos in a file as you're working through it that are unrelated to your current change. This is something that we'll look at in future weeks! But if you want to play through it now, try doing `git add -p`

### Captain Pro Tip

Be careful about using some of the commands like `git add -A` or `-u`. They can save time, but they can also lead to commits that are too big. Better to simply 


## git commit

Start with `tldr git-commit`.

Now -- `tldr git-commit` gives you a lot of options that we haven't talked about. I've been pretty pedantic about using `git commit` and only `git commit`, with maybe a `git -v`. You'll see one of the first options here hasn't even been mentioned yet: `git commit -m "{{message}}"`. This has been by design.


### Captain's Soapbox - git commit -m

`git commit -m` makes the process of making a `git commit` very easy to do. `-am` shortens down that process even more by also adding modified files into your commit. In fact, one of the most common pieces of `git` teaching out there is to use `git commit -m "{{message}}"` and `git commit -am "{{message}}"`.

But using `git commit -m` and `-am` lead to **bad habits**. They lead to poor messages that clutter up your repo and make it very easy to write crappy commit messages.

Remember: git commit messages are for your future developer self or for other developers. They explain the why of changes. When you have to revert problems or do code archaeology, good git commit messages can be a huge boon. Raymond Hettinger, one of the core developers of Python, says that "80% of software development is maintaining/reading old code." So do yourself a favor and write good messages.

So, is it ever appropriate/useful to use `-m`? Absolutely. But you should know _why_ to use it and _how_ to use it. I'll go over that in future weeks.


### The better way of committing

The better way to do _most_ of your commits -- especially the ones you intend to publish/share with others -- is to use the `-v` option to get a diff of your changes inside your commit log. Use your text editor to write good commit messages!


## git log

Start with `tldr git-log`.

`git log` is an incredibly powerful tool in your `git` arsenal. It lets you navigate around your history, look at changes, and get information about previous commits: what's changed, who the author was, the time, how it looks like in a pretty graph form, and more.

Some of these commands are so useful that I've defined some `git alias`es that I use on a regular basis to look at my git commit history. Git aliases are something we'll talk about in a future week!


## git diff

Start with `tldr git-diff`.

Before using `-v` on my commits, I often used `git diff --staged` to see what changes I had staged. I'll still use this from time to time. 

`git diff` is often used to compare commits between one another. What's the difference between this commit and this commit from the past? `git diff` also powers the `-v` option for `git commit`. And, in general, learning how to look at `diffs` is a powerful concept that transcends `git`.

**Pro-tip**: If you're on Windows and like GUI Tools, check out **WinMerge**, which is a great free, open source diff/merging utility.


## git show

At last! We get to `git show`. Start with `tldr git-show`. If `git log` is the higher view that shows the history, `git show` is what we use to examine individual commits more closely. It's very useful for examining individual commits and seeing what changed in them. There are a lot of different options,and I highly encourage you to try them out!


## Conclusion

`git` has a lot of commands, including many that we haven't gotten too yet. It's an incredibly powerful tool with a pretty terrible (even hostile) user experience. But it's the defacto standard for source control these days, and so the best thing to do is to suck it up and learn it.

Part of being a good developer is familiarity with your tools. Source control isn't as sexy as learning cool language features or knowing algorithms, but it's just as important if you want to be a practicing developer.

Tomorrow... we'll finally be pushing our project up to a remote! ARE YOU EXCITED?!
