Day 6 - Pushing our project to a remote
=======================================

So we've made our project, made some commits, and now it's time to push up to a public remote!

We'll go through that process together, including how to push by ssh (which is much nicer than username/pw).

But first - being a good `git` citizen.


## Being a good git citizen

There's a lot of scary/intimidating things that happen when you step your toes out into the world of sharing with collaborators. But it's also scary for the people you work with because git can let you do _terrible, powerful things_ -- like _erasing_ someone else's history. Good projects will be configured to disallow this... but not every project that you'll collaborate on (at work or with friends) will have that.

So, remember the golden rule: **Do not rewrite history that isn't your own.**


## Choosing where to store your code

There are a lot of places and options for storing your code that are free to use:

- [github.com](https://github.com)
- [gitlab.com](https://gitlab.com)
- [bitbucket.org](https://bitbucket.org)

All of these options are good. I've got multiple accounts on github and bitbucket. And most of them will offer what you need. So, which one to choose?

### tldr - Choose GitHub

Choose GitHub. GitHub has everything that you'll need as a private developer:

- Unlimited private repos
- Basic issue tracking
- The ability to take collaborators and PRs from a huge group of collaborators

What's more, if you have any interest in programming as a career, your online public git repositories will serve as a pseudo portfolio for you. You'll instantly get points from companies if you have one. GitHub is the defacto standard. Choose GitHub if you don't have a reason to choose something else! The rest of this course will assume you're using GitHub.


### What did the Captain choose?

Waaaaay back in the day, I chose **bitbucket** because GitHub didn't offer unlimited private repositories and bitbucket did. That's no longer an issue.


### But what about Microsoft/that code thingy they're doing now/etc.

It's perfectly reasonable to have concerns about GitHub as a service and not want to use them. And if you do, more power to you! Choose something that makes you comfortable! I just won't be going over every option.

If it makes you feel any better, almost every major project out there in the Open Source universe is on GitHub these days. I mean, Linus Torvalds keeps a copy of the Linux kernel source tree on github: https://github.com/torvalds/linux.

You can use GitHub! It's okay!


## Setting up on GitHub

Now we'll walk through getting set up on GitHub!


### One more note before we get into the nitty gritty...

These details are going to be as accurate as can be as of the day I'm writing this (July 16, 2021). Depending on when you access this course, the details might have changed! Things are changing all the time, but the underlying philosophy should be relatively stable.


### Creating our GitHub account

1. Navigate to [github.com](https://github.com) and find the `[Sign Up]` button.
2. Go through the Sign Up process. In order, I had to:
   - Type in an email address
   - Type in a password
   - Choose a username
   - Solve a COOL CAPTCHA!
   - Decline getting promotional emails
   - Watch a COOOOOOOOOL transition as I zoomed through space
3. Look at our fancy landing page! Click on `[Create repository]`

Optionally, there's a GitHub guide that you can go through. You might want to do that just to see what they have to offer. They'll cover things we haven't gotten to yet. This course will assume you haven't, but more resources are never a bad thing (as long as they're good resources).


### Creating our first repository

1. Give your repository a name. Be descriptive!
   - Prefer `lowercase-with-dashes` for your repository name
   - `lowercase_with_underscore` looks gross in URLs. (In general - avoid underscores in URLs if you can).
   - `my.domain.name` is a good choice for repos that are for websites (like `therealcaptaindanger.github.io`)
   - Be specific. `my-python-project` is not specific
   - Pick a convention of naming your repos
    - One convention I like is `language|framework|relatedapp-specific-name-of-project`. So `python-diceroller` or `vim-diceroller`. (See [Tim Pope's GitHub](https://github.com/tpope) for examples).
2. Give an optional description
3. Make your repo **Public** or **Private**.
4. Don't add a `README.md` or `.gitignore` or a `license`. You've already got a `README.md`, we'll be covering `.gitignore` later, and `license`s are beyond the scope of this course. At least for now!
5. Click `[Create repository]`

Congrats! You'll be brought to a screen, which will give you a bunch of options for pushing an existing repository or creating a new repository... and we're not going to do any of that yet! We have MORE SET UP to do!

## Configuring .ssh

There are (loosely) two ways of pushing up content to a remote like GitHub (or one of the others): **https** and **ssh**.

**https** is the way most people push up, and it involves authenticating to GitHub using your username and password. And that's... fine. But you should be securing your account with a _strong_ password, which means every time you want to push, you'll need to use a password manager or type in something crazy long. That's just a bunch of hassle.

I strongly advocate using **ssh**, which we'll be setting up together.

### What is ssh?

**ssh** stands for **Secure Shell Protocol**, which uses **public cryptography** to perform secure network operations over an unsecure network. ssh is commonly used for logging into servers remotely. In our case, we'll be using ssh authentication to push our changes across the internet.

How SSH (and public crypotgraphy) work is beyond the scope of this course, but it underpins a lot of what we do with modern computing. Spoilers: it involves a lot of _really cool_ math.

### Creating our .ssh identity

Back to our local computer!

1. Open up your terminal
2. Navigate to your home directory by typing in `cd ~`
3. We'll want to make a new directory called `.ssh`. You can do this with the command `mkdir .ssh`
4. Now we want to **c**hange **d**irectories to go to that folder. So type in `cd .ssh`
5. Type in `ssh-keygen`. You'll get a prompt something like this: 

   ```
   Generating public/private rsa key pair.
   Enter file in which to save the key (/home/captain/.ssh/id_rsa):
   ```

6. Type in a good, descriptive name. I recommend `site_user`. So, in my case, it would be `github_captain` (I'm using `captain` instead of the full `captaindanger` or `captain_danger` because this is just for me).
7. Enter a passphrase (optional). 
   - I usually use a passphrase, but this is definitely optional.

     "But didn't you just say that you don't like typing in passwords?!"

     Well... yes. But an `.ssh` passphrase is different. For one, if someone has access to your `.ssh` private key, you're already screwed. They've got access to your system and can do a lot of harm. A passphrase offers a *small* amount of protection - like a pin code on your phone, or a lock on your front door.

At this point, you'll get something like this:

```
Your identification has been saved in github_captain
Your public key has been saved in github_captain.pub
The key fingerprint is:
SHA256:AwMhnZyjNG7l70MxrFhwCysyndxTZ6HrIlrfqI3K+XI captain@Skyshield
The key's randomart image is:
+---[RSA 3072]----+
|o. .. o     ... o|
| o.. o + .   o.Eo|
|+.o * o + . o  o.|
|+* . * B . o . . |
|B   o * S   . o  |
|oo . . o * o .   |
|+ .     o + .    |
| o         o     |
|            .    |
+----[SHA256]-----+
```

### Wait, what the heck just happened?

Let's take this line-by-line.

#### The Private Key

This first line is telling us where our **private** key has been generated to. In this case, `github_captain` is a text file that contains the private key:

```
Your identification has been saved in github_captain
```

If you `cat <my_private_key_file>`, you'll see something like this outputted to the terminal:

```
-----BEGIN OPENSSH PRIVATE KEY-----
manylinesofcrypticoutputthatdefinitelydontlooklikewhativeputhereandtha
tprobablywraparoundtoanotherlineandhasmanymorelinesthantheshortfakeout
putthatIveputhereAndthatalsoLikelyhasManyCapitalsandverypossiblyendswi
thanequalssignontheendlikethis=
-----END OPENSSH PRIVATE KEY-----
```

This file is your private key.

**You must never ever EVER share this key with anyone. ANYONE!** This key is what keeps you safe. If this key is ever compromised, then you'll want to delete this key pair and generate something new.

#### Public Key

Next we have a line saying where our **public key** was stored. In this case, `github_captain.pub` is a text file that contains the public key:

```
Your public key has been saved in github_captain.pub
```

Note how these two are paired:

- `github_captain` -- private
- `github_captain.pub` -- public

Once again, you can `cat github_captain.pub` this information out to the command line, and you'll get something like this:

```
ssh-rsa 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 captain@Skyshield
```

You'll actually need to do this later. This **public** key is what we'll be putting into github. But that'll come shortly. Let's keep looking at what we have next!


#### Key Fingerprint

```
The key fingerprint is:
SHA256:AwMhnZyjNG7l70MxrFhwCysyndxTZ6HrIlrfqI3K+XI captain@Skyshield
```

The key fingerprint is a signature that you use when logging into a remote for the first time. This key fingerprint needs to match exactly, or you know that _something has gone wrong_.


#### Key randomart

Key randomart is very similar to a key fingerprint. The beauty of a randomart is that it's **visual**. When you're logging into a server, you can look at the randomart and quickly identify that it's right. If something changes, you'll know that something is off.

```
The key's randomart image is:
+---[RSA 3072]----+
|o. .. o     ... o|
| o.. o + .   o.Eo|
|+.o * o + . o  o.|
|+* . * B . o . . |
|B   o * S   . o  |
|oo . . o * o .   |
|+ .     o + .    |
| o         o     |
|            .    |
+----[SHA256]-----+
```


### Configuring ssh - ~/.ssh/config

Next, we need to configure our ssh config file to use our newly generated key. 

Start by typing `vim config`

The SSH config file is a flat text file with some whitespace indents and the ability to add comments.

First, let's enable `VisualHostKey`:

```
# Use Viusal Key Art
VisualHostKey yes
```

Next, we'll configure our ssh connection to github.

```
# Captain Danger's GitHub Account
Host captain.github.com
    HostName github.com
    User git
    IdentityFile ~/.ssh/github_captain
```

FEW THINGS TO NOTE!
- `# Captain Danger's Github Account` -- replace `Captain Danger` with your name
- `Host captain.github.com` -- You'll want to replace the `captain` part with some other descriptor. 
  - For example, if your name is `bob`, you might do `bob.github.com`. Or, if this is just your personal account, you might do `personal.github.com`. Or, if this is your work account, you might do `work.github.com`. Etc., etc.
- `IdentityFile` -- This should match the name of the identify file that you generated earlier

In total, our file should look like this:

```
# Use Viusal Key Art
VisualHostKey=yes

# {{Your Name}}'s GitHub Account
Host {{your_name}}.github.com
    HostName github.com
    User git
    IdentityFile ~/.ssh/github_{{your_name}}
```

Okay, that's all for now! Back to GitHub!


### Adding our **Public** Key to Github

1. Copy the contents of your `github_username.pub` file. Lot of different ways to do this, and I leave it up to the reader to decide how. I change my method based on the environment I'm in.
2. On GitHub, go to the upper-right corner, click on your user icon.
3. Select `Settings` from the drop down menu (mine has it second from the bottom).
4. From the left-hand menu, select `SSH and GPG Keys`.
5. Click on `[New SSH Key]`.
6. Give a descriptive title. I always include username and the name of the computer I'm uploading from.
7. Paste our **public key** from earlier into the `Key` box.
8. Click `[Add SSH Key]`
9. Re-type your GitHub password if prompted.


### Test our SSH Key!

- Type `ssh -T git@captain.github.com` -- remember to replace `captain` with whatever you used for your **Host** earlier.
- Verify that the fingerprint from GitHub matches what you find on their [documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/github/authenticating-to-github/keeping-your-account-and-data-secure/githubs-ssh-key-fingerprints).
- Type in your passphrase if you have one

Voila! You've now successfully authenticated to github!


## Pushing our repository

We're almost there! Time to go back to our repository page.

1. Navigate to your project directory
2. Check to make sure we're in the right place with a `git log` or a `git status`.
3. On your GitHub page, click the `[SSH]` button.
4. Navigate down to **...or push an existing repository from the command line**
5. Copy the first line, which will look something like this: `git remote add origin git@github.com:{{YourGithubUserName}}/python-diceroller.git`
6. Open your terminal
7. Paste in the command -- **but don't hit enter!**

    You need to slightly adjust this command. The way we configured ssh means that it won't know what to look for with just `git@github.com`. Instead, you'll need to change the second part of that to match your Host from your `~/.ssh/config` file.

    In my case, that looks like `git@captain.github.com`. The full command, then is `git remote add origin git@captain.github.com:TheRealCaptainDanger/python-diceroller.git`

    Then, hit enter.

    If you messed this up (like I did when writing this), you may have to remove the origin remote with `git remote rm origin`.
8. Type in `git push -u origin main`.
9. If you have a passphrase, it'll ask you to enter the passphrase.
10. Watch a whole bunch of text go by as you finally push your repo up onto the internet!
    - The host key fingerprint (and art) you see should match what you saw earlier with `ssh -T`

There's more to go over in the `git push` output, but we'll leave that for another time.


## HUZZAH!

Go to your GitHub account and refresh your repository. You should see your source file there. Feel free to explore around. Anything you do in the cloud won't break what's happening locally.

At least not until you intentionally share it with others.
