Day 7 - More commits!
=====================

Now that we've got our repository up on a remote, it's time to make some more commits! We're going to break some good software engineering practice here today, but it's all in the name of learning!


## Adding diceroller.py usage

Being able to cleanly define what our CLI utility does would be nice. So let's go ahead and add some usage lines to our error handling:

- `print("Usage: ./diceroller.py N -- N must be a number!")`

We'll add this same line in both of our error handling blocks. So the code in the end will look something like this:

```python
import random
import sys

def dice(n):
    print(f"You rolled a {random.randint(1, n)}")

if len(sys.argv) != 2:
    print("Only takes one argument!")
    print("Usage: ./diceroller.py N -- N must be a number!")
    sys.exit(1)

try:
    sides = int(sys.argv[1])
except ValueError:
    print("Argument must be a number!")
    print("Usage: ./diceroller.py N -- N must be a number!")
    sys.exit(1)

dice(sides)
```

Now, repeated code isn't great, but for illustrative purposes, this is what we've got.


### More vim

One powerful feature of vim is being able to cut/copy entire lines and move them around. In `vim`, there is no `cut`: all deletion actions from `NORMAL` mode will automatically cut. Copying in `vim` is called **yanking**. So, let's learn! Type these actions in order:

```
/Only[Enter]
yy
p
f"
ci"
Usage: ./diceroller.py N -- N must be a number![Esc]
yy
/Argument[Enter]
p
:wq
```

So, what did we just do?

- `/Only[Enter]` -- `/` in `vim` starts the **search** ability of `vim`. `Only` is the text we're searching for. `[Enter]` finishes the search and takes us to the line
- `yy` -- `y` stands for **yank**, which as stated earlier, is the `vim` name for copying. `yy` is a shortcut for yanking an entire line
- `p` -- `p` stands for **put**, which is the `vim` name for pasting. This pastes what we had just yanked, after us. Because we yanked an entire line, `vim` is smart enough to place that line after the current line we're on
- `f"` -- `f` stands for **find character**, and we want to search for the double quotations mark `"` 
- `ci"` -- `c` stands for **change**, `i` for **in**, and `"` completes the sentence. Roughly: **c**hange **i**n **"** (the quotation marks)
- Note we are now in `INSERT` mode. Note also that we're **inside** the quotes. We don't have to readd the quotes!
- `Usage: ./diceroller.py N -- N must be a number![Esc]` -- This is just us entering the text that we want to put in. `[ESC]` returns us to the `NORMAL` mode
- `yy` -- `y` stands for **yank**; `yy` is the shortcut for yanking an entire line
- `/Argument[Enter]` -- `/` starts **search**. `Argument` is what we're searching for. `[Enter]` finishes the search and takes us to the line
- `p` -- `p` stands for **put** or **paste**. Because we yanked an entire line, `vim` pastes the line after the current line we're on
- `:wq` -- I hope you know what this does by this point. :)

**Note:** This is not the most _efficient_ way of doing these changes. It's just one way. :)


### Captain's Soapbox -- Vim efficiency

Learning `vim` is not about learning efficiency; efficiency is a _byproduct_ of using `vim`. Learning the language and ways of moving around makes your editing more efficient by making it easier to translate thoughts into action. `vim` is particularly useful to programmers because of the structured nature of code. We work in lines and pairs of parentheses and quotation marks. Much of the design of `vim` and `vi` (the predecessor of `vim`) is about facilitating editing code and structured text.

Look at two of the commands we just used:

- Yanking entire lines (or deleting entire lines with `dd`) -- because, as programmers, we often deal in entire lines
- Changing inside the contents of a matching pair of quotation marks (or parentheses, or brackets, or curly braces...) -- because, as programmers, we often need to change the inside of matched quotation marks, parentheses, brackets, and more

If you were using the mouse, you might try and copy the whole line, maybe miss some of the spacing. You'd paste. You'd highlight the inside of the quotes and hit the `[backspace]` or `[delete]` key. You'd type in the whole line again. Then you'd have to do the whole thing to copy it a second time (ignoring, of course, that duplication isn't something we generally want to do as programmers).

Of course, if you're using a good editor on the text-ID(E) scale, then your editor likely has commands for doing some of these functions. And learning your tools is really important! But what if you have to switch editors? What if you have to switch OS's? What if you just like having multiple editors for different things? You'd need to learn different shortcuts in each editor to accomplish the same stuff... or you'd go back to using the mouse and highlighting. Or using your OS specific commands.

That's context switching. It adds friction between what your thought is and the code on the page. Learning `vim` gives you a common language that works across a huge number of editors and configurations. It lets you get more productive faster in your tool of choice. You can _edit text_ faster.

When I had originally written the above instructions, I used `ci(` to change inside parentheses, instead of `ci"`. `ci"` is absolutely more efficient (you save one or two keystrokes!!!!). But `ci(` was an effortless thought to me. Thought went to keyboard. Did I lose some efficiency? In the absolutist sense... yes. But I was still efficient because text went to keyboard.

And `vim` is a tool that grows with you. If you use `vim` and find yourself performing some tedious task over and over, there's a _very_ good chance that there's a built-in solution to your problem. And in the rare few cases there aren't, there's definitely a plugin that someone made to solve the issue.

But! This course isn't **Learning Vim With Captain Danger**. That might be done at some point in the future, but for now, if you _do_ have an interest in `vim`, check out the `vimtutor`! It goes over all the basics.


## Testing our changes

Because we're good developers, we'll test our changes after we finish our code.

```
$ python diceroller.py fea
Argument must be a number!
Usage: ./diceroller.py N -- N must be a number!
$ python diceroller.py
Only takes one argument!
Usage: ./diceroller.py N -- N must be a number!
$ python diceroller.py 4
You rolled a 2
```

Grea! Our changes work. Let's add and commit.


## Commiting our code

Remember the steps:

1. Check the status of our repo with `git status`
2. Stage the change with `git add`
3. Check that we've got all the changes we want with `git status` 
4. Commit the change with `git commit`
5. Look at our `git log` for the dopamine of it all.

At this point, we've made enough commits that I'm not going to walk you through the instructions on how to do this. You should be _very_ familiar with it at this point. But here are some reminders:

- Add individual files -- resist the temptation to do something else!
- Use `-v` to see a diff of your changes in the commit log.
- Write a _good commit_ message. Here's mine:

```
$ git log -1
commit 89787676334f10567c5ca69dd3d02dcd9984bfba (HEAD -> main)
Author: Captain Danger <therealcaptaindanger@gmail.com>
Date:   Sun Jul 18 02:29:57 2021 -0500

    Add usage examples

    We want our CLI experience to be more friendly, so we're going to
    pipe out usage if we get an erroneous argument.
```

## Making `diceroller.py` executable

You know... it's kind of awful having to type in `python3` every time before executing our code. Wouldn't it be dreamy if we could just type in `./diceroller.py 20` and have it just automatically know what to do and execute? Well, you're in luck, because we're going to make that change!

It's as simple as adding the execute permission! (It's actually not, but indulge me for a sec.)

How do we do that? We use a new utility called `chmod`. `chmod` is the utility we use in Unix systems to change permissions. `chmod` is short for **change modes**. For our purposes, modes are equivalent to file permissions/file security. (It's a little more than that, and you should go read about it if the internals of Unix are interesting to you!)

Let's start, as always, with `tldr chmod`. Hey, look, lots of commands we can do! We want to make this file readable and executable by everyone, so we'll use `chmod a+rx diceroller.py`. 

Now... of course, that changes it for _us_, but that doesn't really help everyone else... does it?

Does it?

Check out `git status`... it will say that `diceroller.py` has been modified. Now do `git diff`:

```
diff --git a/diceroller.py b/diceroller.py
old mode 100644
new mode 100755
```

If you've been following along, you'll see that the `mode` has changed. Yes! Git tracks file modes. That means that if you were to commit this change to another service and then download the fresh repo, your `diceroller.py` script will already have the execute permission set.

So! Let's go ahead and commit that change! We don't need to test!

Here's what my commit message looks like:

```
$ git log -1
commit b290cda60a9795735b788235d41900dea305f734 (HEAD -> main)
Author: Captain Danger <therealcaptaindanger@gmail.com>
Date:   Sun Jul 18 02:53:52 2021 -0500

    Add the execute permission

    We want to be able to just run diceroller.py without having to
    invoke python3 every time.
```

## You know.... I don't like how we repeated ourselves...

You know, it's pretty crappy to have repeated ourselves. Two lines of exactly repeated code? What happens if we have more errors? We should definitely have a different way of doing this... I know! What about a `usage()` function?

Let's make that change:

```python
import random
import sys

def usage():
    print("Usage: ./diceroller.py N -- N must be a number!")

def dice(n):
    print(f"You rolled a {random.randint(1, n)}")

if len(sys.argv) != 2:
    print("Only takes one argument!")
    usage()
    sys.exit(1)

try:
    sides = int(sys.argv[1])
except ValueError:
    print("Argument must be a number!")
    usage()
    sys.exit(1)

dice(sides)

```

I'm not going to do the full `vim` runthrough here this time. See if you can use some of the commands you learned earlier to make the edits easier. Here are some commands you know that will make this easier:

- `yy`
- `dd`
- `p`
- `/`

Here're some other commands that might be helpful...

- `C` (That's a capital C)
- `{`
- `}`

Good luck!

Now that we've made our change, let's `status`, `add`, `status`, `commit`! We don't need to test!

Here's what my commit message looks like:

```
$ git log -1
commit 7ce40f26d1669ba95193c0da09c91254d41a68f1 (HEAD -> main)
Author: Captain Danger <therealcaptaindanger@gmail.com>
Date:   Sun Jul 18 03:06:21 2021 -0500

    Extract usage helper text to usage() function

    Instead of just having the usage text copy pasted a bunch of times,
    we'll use the power of code reuse to have our usage in just one
    place. Code reuse!
```

## Finally... testing!

Let's try out our new code:

```
$ ./diceroller.py
./diceroller.py: line 1: import: command not found
./diceroller.py: line 2: import: command not found
./diceroller.py: line 4: syntax error near unexpected token `('
./diceroller.py: line 4: `def usage():'
```

Uh... what happened?

Well, turns out that even though we added the execute permission, Linux doesn't know what to execute this as. By default, it thinks it's just going to be some kind of script. We need to somehow tell Linux what kind of file this is -- or, rather, what **executable** we want to run this script with.

We do that with a **shebang** line.

## !shebang

What is a **shebang** line? A **shebang** line is the first line of a script file that starts with a `#` and a `!` together. It usually looks something like this:

- `#!/bin/bash`
- `#! /usr/bin/env python3`

When the shebang line is the first line in the script, it tells the Operating System (through an `exec` function) what to run as. As always, there's a ton to learn about the underlying technology and history. If you're curious, take a peek through the [wikipedia article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shebang_(Unix)).

So! Let's add the **shebang** line to our file. It should look something like this:

```python
#! /usr/bin/env python3

import random
import sys

def usage():
    print("Usage: ./diceroller.py N -- N must be a number!")

def dice(n):
    print(f"You rolled a {random.randint(1, n)}")

if len(sys.argv) != 2:
    print("Only takes one argument!")
    usage()
    sys.exit(1)

try:
    sides = int(sys.argv[1])
except ValueError:
    print("Argument must be a number!")
    usage()
    sys.exit(1)

dice(sides)

```

### Breaking apart the shebang line

We added this to the top of our file: `#! /usr/bin/env python3`.

- `#!` -- this is the magic... the **shebang**. Curiously enough, this is a clever piece of programming that makes a **magic number** readable. From Wikipedia:

  > The shebang is actually a human-readable instance of a magic number in the executable file, the magic byte string being 0x23 0x21, the two-character encoding in ASCII of #!. This magic number is detected by the "exec" family of functions, which determine whether a file is a script or an executable binary. The presence of the shebang will result in the execution of the specified executable, usually an interpreter for the script's language.

* `/usr/bin/env` -- this is a path to an executable called `env`. `env` does a lot of things. Check out `tldr env` for some examples and introductory reading. For our purposes, we use `env` to find the appropriate version of an executable.
- `python3` -- this is an argument to `/usr/bin/env` telling us what we want `env` to run. In this case, we want `env` to find and run `python3` and then execute our script


## Testing again...

Let's try that one more time.

```
$ ./diceroller.py
Only takes one argument!
Usage: ./diceroller.py N -- N must be a number!

$ ./diceroller.py 2
You rolled a 2

$ ./diceroller.py abc
Argument must be a number!
Usage: ./diceroller.py N -- N must be a number!
```

Awesome! Looks like that now works. One nifty thing about the execute permission is that it will enable tab completion when you do `./`. Try this out in your terminal: `./d` and then hit `[tab]`. Cool, huh?

Okay, now that we've tested and got this working, let's status, add, status, commit. Here's what I wrote for my commit message:

```
$ git log -1
commit da19b4de63e51eb913ad516bfb060dfac50ed868 (HEAD -> main)
Author: Captain Danger <therealcaptaindanger@gmail.com>
Date:   Sun Jul 18 03:29:58 2021 -0500

    Add shebang line

    We need the shebang line in order to make this script properly
    executable. Whoops!
```

## Let's check our log again...

Do `git log`. Wow, look at all those entries! Now check out `git log --oneline`. Much more readable.

Still... it'd be nice to just have a nice way to look at all the commits we did today. Let's check out `tldr git-log` and see if it's got anything. Hmm... there's an option for using `--after` but that doesn't seem that great. I suppose we could use the `-n` to show the last number of commits, but I don't necessarily remember how many commits we did.

Wouldn't it be dreamy if we could just see all the commits that we've done from the last time we pushed up to our `origin` remote (aka, Github/bitbucket/wherever)?

Well good news: Git actually provides a cool way of doing just that. We shall invoke an arcane series of symbols to do our bidding!

- `git log @{u}..`

Here's what we get:

```
$ git log @{u}..
commit da19b4de63e51eb913ad516bfb060dfac50ed868 (HEAD -> main)
Author: Captain Danger <therealcaptaindanger@gmail.com>
Date:   Sun Jul 18 03:29:58 2021 -0500

    Add shebang line

    We need the shebang line in order to make this script properly
    executable. Whoops!

commit 7ce40f26d1669ba95193c0da09c91254d41a68f1
Author: Captain Danger <therealcaptaindanger@gmail.com>
Date:   Sun Jul 18 03:06:21 2021 -0500

    Extract usage helper text to usage() function

    Instead of just having the usage text copy pasted a bunch of times,
    we'll use the power of code reuse to have our usage in just one
    place. Code reuse!

commit b290cda60a9795735b788235d41900dea305f734
Author: Captain Danger <therealcaptaindanger@gmail.com>
Date:   Sun Jul 18 02:53:52 2021 -0500

    Add the execute permission

    We want to be able ot just run diceroller.py without having to
    invoke python3 every time.

commit 89787676334f10567c5ca69dd3d02dcd9984bfba
Author: Captain Danger <therealcaptaindanger@gmail.com>
Date:   Sun Jul 18 02:29:57 2021 -0500

    Add usage examples

    We want our CLI experience to be more friendly, so we're going to
    pipe out usage if we get an erroneous argument.
```

Look at that! That's all the commits we've made today. Pretty cool, huh? We'll just move on now without explaining what we did...

Just kidding!


### More about `git log`

Certain `git` commands, including `log` let you perform operations across a **range** of commits. In fact, there's a whole mini-language on referring to different commits that involve arcane symbols that probably made sense to Linus, but aren't the greatest user experience these days. Alas, we're stuck with what we're stuck with, so let's learn a little by breaking down our previous command `git log @{u}..`:

- `git log` -- we're already familiar with this command.
- `@{u}` -- this is a special reference inside `git`. It stands for the **upstream** commit. What is the upstream? The upstream is what we previously pushed to, whether that's GitHub or someplace else. `@{u}` is a powerful tag that we will be using in the future when we get to a concept called **rebasing**.
- `..` -- the `..` tells `git` that we want to look at a **range** of commits. The format is:
  - The commit **before** the first one I want to look at
  - `..`
  - The **last** commit I want to look at
  - IF either side of the `..` has no commit, it will just go as far as it possibly can - to the very beginning or the very end.

  So, `@{u}..` says give me a **range** of commits, starting with the commit **after** the **upstream** commit and going all the way to the end.

Confused? Yeah, it's arcane (or outright hostile), but you'll just have to learn it if you want to get proficient with `git`. Think of it like semi-colons in C-like languages.


## Time to push our changes up ...?

Alright, we've finished our day, and we're proud of the work we did... Now's the time to push up our changes, right? Well... no. Actually, not yet. See, there's a problem with our git history--an insidious problem that will cause some serious rot to your future projects if you don't learn how to deal with it. So we don't want to push up just yet... we'll look at the problem (and what to do about it) in the next lesson!
