Day 08 - Rebasing Part 1 - Narrating the History of our project
=============================================

Today, we're going to talk about an insidious problem that props up in git commit histories: bad, nonsense commits where changes happen all over the place.

Let's look at the short one line version to demonstrate:

```
$ git log --oneline @{u}..
da19b4d (HEAD -> main) Add shebang line
7ce40f2 Extract usage helper text to usage() function
b290cda Add the execute permission
8978767 Add usage examples
```

We've really made two kinds of changes the previous day:

1. We've made our `diceroller.py` executable on its own
2. We've added some usage to our error handling.

Looking at the history, we've got four commits. Now, of course, that's how it actually happened (sort of). We really did write and make four commits. But that's only because we didn't test. If you're like me, you might have made some typos in between all of your saves, and those saves aren't represented here in history.  All these commits individually are fine. They're atomic and have good commit messages. They do, to some degree, tell the story of our project.

But they're not **useful** when we look back on them. When we go back and do archeology on the changes made to `diceroller`, we have to look at two separate commits to get the true story on making diceroller executable. We have to look at two separate commits to get the true story on our addition of `usage()`.

If we'd been more thoughtful as we write our code, we might have made all those changes together at the same time while writing them. We might have been smart enough to remember the shebang line or test our code. We could have saw the duplication right away and made our function right away. Then we might have a commit history like this:

```
$ git log --oneline @{u}..
da19b4d (HEAD -> main) Add shebang line
b290cda Add the execute permission
7ce40f2 Extract usage helper text to usage() function
8978767 Add usage examples
```

That commit history is a little better. The commits are all ordered together in a logical sequence. First we made the usage changes and then changed that to a function. Then we made two changes to make our diceroller executable.

But could we do better? If you think about it, the execute permission and shebang line are really the same overall change--they're just unfortunately split across two commits. It's the same with usage() and the examples--really, that's two separate commits.

Let's look at a not-so-extreme example of something I see _all the time_:

```
$ git log --oneline @{u}..
da19b4d (HEAD -> main) Add shebang line
333333 Really really fix typo, for real this time
b290cda Add the execute permission
222222 Really fix typo
111111 Fix typo
7ce40f2 Extract usage helper text to usage() function
8978767 Add usage examples
```

Look at commits 111111, 222222, and 333333. What are these commits actually performing? If we were to do `git show` or a `diff` or a `git bisect` or a `git blame` (things we'll learn about later), then we would see these changes. But none of them would tell us anything truly _useful_ about the code. All we would see are these typo errors.

And why do these typo errors exist? They exist because the programmer of commits 111111, 222222, and 333333 didn't think to actually carefully review his work and save them before hand. So he had to make these commits that really don't tell a good story. They don't tell a good history about your project.

What we _really_ care about are the two big meaningful changes:

1. That we added usage text on bad cmd line args (through the use of a usage() function).
2. That we made diceroller.py executable by giving it the execute permission and added a shebang line.

If we'd been really clean, thoughtful developers, we could have easily combined all those changes into two commits originally. But, because software development is messy, we did it in four separate commits.

And that's _fine_ for when we're working locally. But now that we want to make a permanent record in the history of our project, we can do better!

What if our commit history looked like this?

```
$ git log --oneline @{u}..
abcdef (HEAD -> main) Make diceroller.py executable
bcdefa Add usage text on bad cmd line args
```

That would be a nice clean commit history. And, if we'd saved our files and made our commits that way, that's actually what our commit history would look like.

Of course, because we happened to execute the `git commit` at four specific points in time, we are left with what we have right now: a slightly goofy looking git history that tells a **version** of the truth but not necessarily the best version. Remember - the most _complete_ version of the truth could be every single change as you enter them. In fact, some editors and IDEs will track this. JetBrains products will track multiple versions of your save history file. `vim` will track every different insert you do.

So this:

```
$ git log --oneline @{u}..
da19b4d (HEAD -> main) Add shebang line
7ce40f2 Extract usage helper text to usage() function
b290cda Add the execute permission
8978767 Add usage examples
```

... is just a version of the truth. It's not the full truth.

And if _that's_ not the full truth... wouldn't it be nice to tell a better version of the truth? To show a history that is more useful when looking at the past?

Could we _actually_ make our commit history like this?

```
$ git log --oneline @{u}..
abcdef (HEAD -> main) Make diceroller.py executable
bcdefa Add usage text on bad cmd line args
```

Yes, we can... through the power of **git rebase**.


## What is git rebase?

`git rebase` **re-bases** a series of commits from one point to another. What does that mean? To understand, we have to go into a little bit of theory on the internals of git. Git tracks changes via the calculated difference between different commits. These changes are tracked in a graph of points connecting from one place to another. Every commit is a **node** in a this graph tree. Let's look at where we started:

```
$ git log --oneline @{u}..
da19b4d (HEAD -> main) Add shebang line
7ce40f2 Extract usage helper text to usage() function
b290cda Add the execute permission
8978767 Add usage examples
```

We could also lay these out in a horizontal, linear order, representing their relationship to one another:

```
8978767 -----> bc290cda -----> 7ce40f2 -----> da19b4d
  ^ this is the oldest commit

                        this is the newest commit ^
```

Remember: each commit is a **node** in our tree. Now, what is actually in that node? Well, we can find out by using `git show`:

```
$ git show 8978767
commit 89787676334f10567c5ca69dd3d02dcd9984bfba
Author: Captain Danger <therealcaptaindanger@gmail.com>
Date:   Sun Jul 18 02:29:57 2021 -0500

    Add usage examples

    We want our CLI experience to be more friendly, so we're going to
    pipe out usage if we get an erroneous argument.

diff --git a/diceroller.py b/diceroller.py
index 62a72ac..cad1d63 100644
--- a/diceroller.py
+++ b/diceroller.py
@@ -6,12 +6,14 @@ def dice(n):

 if len(sys.argv) != 2:
     print("Only takes one argument!")
+    print("Usage: ./diceroller.py N -- N must be a number!")
     sys.exit(1)

 try:
     sides = int(sys.argv[1])
 except ValueError:
     print("Argument must be a number!")
+    print("Usage: ./diceroller.py N -- N must be a number!")
     sys.exit(1)

 dice(sides)
```

See our diff? That's what `git` is storing -- the two lines that change along with some metadata (like our commit message). `git` does this for a couple reasons.

One is that it **saves space**. Imagine if we didn't use `git`, but a different version control system. In the backup every time VCS (version control system), we just make an entire copy of a file that's changed. That means that every time we save a new commit, we're adding a whole bunch of extra data. Git doesn't do that -- git only cares about the _changes_ from commit to commit (or from node to node). By storing only the changes, we save space. 

But! We also enable something incredibley powerful -- the ability to rewrite history -- to move nodes (or commits) and give them _different parents_ and _differnet children_. `git` calls this action **rebasing**.


## Okay, but how does that enable us to change history?

The key here is that **nodes** (or **commits**) only store **changes.** Let's take a deeper look at all of our changes with `git show @{u}..`. (If you've been paying attention, you might have an idea as to what this does):

```
$ git show @{u}..
commit da19b4de63e51eb913ad516bfb060dfac50ed868 (HEAD -> main)
Author: Captain Danger <therealcaptaindanger@gmail.com>
Date:   Sun Jul 18 03:29:58 2021 -0500

    Add shebang line

    We need the shebang line in order to make this script properly
    executable. Whoops!

diff --git a/diceroller.py b/diceroller.py
index 04da5e6..65450a7 100755
--- a/diceroller.py
+++ b/diceroller.py
@@ -1,3 +1,5 @@
+#! /usr/bin/env python3
+
 import random
 import sys


commit 7ce40f26d1669ba95193c0da09c91254d41a68f1
Author: Captain Danger <therealcaptaindanger@gmail.com>
Date:   Sun Jul 18 03:06:21 2021 -0500

    Extract usage helper text to usage() function

    Instead of just having the usage text copy pasted a bunch of times,
    we'll use the power of code reuse to have our usage in just one
    place. Code reuse!

diff --git a/diceroller.py b/diceroller.py
index cad1d63..04da5e6 100755
--- a/diceroller.py
+++ b/diceroller.py
@@ -1,19 +1,22 @@
 import random
 import sys

+def usage():
+    print("Usage: ./diceroller.py N -- N must be a number!")
+
 def dice(n):
     print(f"You rolled a {random.randint(1, n)}")

 if len(sys.argv) != 2:
     print("Only takes one argument!")
-    print("Usage: ./diceroller.py N -- N must be a number!")
+    usage()
     sys.exit(1)

 try:
     sides = int(sys.argv[1])
 except ValueError:
     print("Argument must be a number!")
-    print("Usage: ./diceroller.py N -- N must be a number!")
+    usage()
     sys.exit(1)

 dice(sides)

commit b290cda60a9795735b788235d41900dea305f734
Author: Captain Danger <therealcaptaindanger@gmail.com>
Date:   Sun Jul 18 02:53:52 2021 -0500

    Add the execute permission

    We want to be able ot just run diceroller.py without having to
    invoke python3 every time.

diff --git a/diceroller.py b/diceroller.py
old mode 100644
new mode 100755

commit 89787676334f10567c5ca69dd3d02dcd9984bfba
Author: Captain Danger <therealcaptaindanger@gmail.com>
Date:   Sun Jul 18 02:29:57 2021 -0500

    Add usage examples

    We want our CLI experience to be more friendly, so we're going to
    pipe out usage if we get an erroneous argument.

diff --git a/diceroller.py b/diceroller.py
index 62a72ac..cad1d63 100644
--- a/diceroller.py
+++ b/diceroller.py
@@ -6,12 +6,14 @@ def dice(n):

 if len(sys.argv) != 2:
     print("Only takes one argument!")
+    print("Usage: ./diceroller.py N -- N must be a number!")
     sys.exit(1)

 try:
     sides = int(sys.argv[1])
 except ValueError:
     print("Argument must be a number!")
+    print("Usage: ./diceroller.py N -- N must be a number!")
     sys.exit(1)

 dice(sides)
```

That's right... we can use the range commands with `git show` to show us a range of commands. As a reminder:

- Commit _before_ we want to start `..` Last commit we want to look at
- Blanks count as all the way forward or back in history
- `@{u}` is a special **reference** to our current upstream commit (aka, the last commit we pushed to our remote (or the last one after doing a fetch/pull))

Of course, there's a lot to digest here, so let's snip down some of the content and just focus on the changes. We can do that by using `git show @{u}.. --oneline`:

```
$ git show @{u}.. --oneline
da19b4d (HEAD -> main) Add shebang line
diff --git a/diceroller.py b/diceroller.py
index 04da5e6..65450a7 100755
--- a/diceroller.py
+++ b/diceroller.py
@@ -1,3 +1,5 @@
+#! /usr/bin/env python3
+
 import random
 import sys

7ce40f2 Extract usage helper text to usage() function
diff --git a/diceroller.py b/diceroller.py
index cad1d63..04da5e6 100755
--- a/diceroller.py
+++ b/diceroller.py
@@ -1,19 +1,22 @@
 import random
 import sys

+def usage():
+    print("Usage: ./diceroller.py N -- N must be a number!")
+
 def dice(n):
     print(f"You rolled a {random.randint(1, n)}")

 if len(sys.argv) != 2:
     print("Only takes one argument!")
-    print("Usage: ./diceroller.py N -- N must be a number!")
+    usage()
     sys.exit(1)

 try:
     sides = int(sys.argv[1])
 except ValueError:
     print("Argument must be a number!")
-    print("Usage: ./diceroller.py N -- N must be a number!")
+    usage()
     sys.exit(1)

 dice(sides)
b290cda Add the execute permission
diff --git a/diceroller.py b/diceroller.py
old mode 100644
new mode 100755
8978767 Add usage examples
diff --git a/diceroller.py b/diceroller.py
index 62a72ac..cad1d63 100644
--- a/diceroller.py
+++ b/diceroller.py
@@ -6,12 +6,14 @@ def dice(n):

 if len(sys.argv) != 2:
     print("Only takes one argument!")
+    print("Usage: ./diceroller.py N -- N must be a number!")
     sys.exit(1)

 try:
     sides = int(sys.argv[1])
 except ValueError:
     print("Argument must be a number!")
+    print("Usage: ./diceroller.py N -- N must be a number!")
     sys.exit(1)

 dice(sides)
```

There we go! Just the short oneline versions of our commits and the diffs. Now, working backwards, we can see the changes:

- `8978767` adds two `print()` lines to the previous commit
- `b290cda` changes the file mode from `100644` to `100755`
- `7ce40f2` adds the `usage()` function, removes the two `print()` lines, and adds in the two `usage()` 
- `da19b4d` adds the shebang line to the top of the file

Here's another way of describing those commits

- When applied on top of the previous commit, commit `8978767` will add two `print()` lines to the previous commit
- When applied on top of the previous commit, commit `b290cda` will change the file mode from `100644` to `100755`
- When applied on top of the previous commit, commit `7ce40f2` will add the `usage()` function, removes the two `print()` lines, and adds in the two `usage()` 
- When applied on top of the previous commit, commit `da19b4d` will add the shebang line to the top of the file

What's really interesting is that none of these commits actually care about what the previous commit is. All they know is how they're going to apply the changes. (There's some un-truth in this, but that will be unravled later on).

Remember how we said that each commit is a **node** on a tree? And that each node (commit) only stores the changes? Armed with that knowledge, `git` provides the incredible power to change the parents.

So we can change history like so:

- When applied on top of the previous commit, commit `8978767` will add two `print()` lines to the previous commit
- When applied on top of the previous commit, commit `7ce40f2` will add the `usage()` function, removes the two `print()` lines, and adds in the two `usage()` 
- When applied on top of the previous commit, commit `b290cda` will change the file mode from `100644` to `100755`
- When applied on top of the previous commit, commit `da19b4d` will add the shebang line to the top of the file

This is what rebasing does.

### Boy, you sure did skip over a bunch of details on how that works?

You're absolutely right I did. It stores changes, yes, but it also does some smart lookups (when you're changing history) to the surrounding content in order to make sure that the way we change history makes sense. `git` is really smart about how it handles diffs when you're doing rebasing, and it can handle a ton of crazy situations. That's not _always_ the case though, in which case you'll run into what's called a **merge conflict**. Merge conflicts are one of the huge headaches of the `git` branching model, and dealing with them is something you'll need to learn. We'll cover it in a later week.

## Okay, but are you actually going to show us rebasing?

Yes! ... Tomorrow. We reviewed a lot of theory, but the theory is important. Here's a summary:

- `git` **commits** are **nodes** in a tree
- `git` commits (nodes) are changes that can be applied to a previous commit
- The parents and children of a git commit can be changed and ordered. This rewriting of history is called **rebasing**

## One last thing...

Tomorrow, we'll actually do a rebase. But before we do that, we're going to do a _little_ bit of practical prep work today: making a backup copy of our source directory. Rebasing is a potentially destructive operation, and there's a solid chance you'll get it wrong the first few times.

So! 

- Open up our terminal to our `~/diceroller` folder.
- Type `cd ..` to move to our parent folder -- `..` is a special name in terminal for the **parent** folder/directory
- Type `cp -R diceroller/ diceroller_backup/` -- `cp` stands for **copy**. `-R` is a switch that lets us **recursively** copy. `diceroller/` is the source and `diceroller_backup/` is the target

That should be it, but just to be safe, `cd diceroller_backup/` and then do `git log --oneline`. You should see the same git commit history. If you don't, then you've done something wrong. Go back and try again!
